Documentation/virt/kvm/arm/ptp_kvm.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

PTP_KVM support for arm/arm64
=============================

PTP_KVM is used for high precision time sync between host and guests.
It relies on transferring the wall clock and counter value from the
host to the guest using a KVM-specific hypercall.

* ARM_SMCCC_VENDOR_HYP_KVM_PTP_FUNC_ID: 0x86000001

This hypercall uses the SMC32/HVC32 calling convention:

ARM_SMCCC_VENDOR_HYP_KVM_PTP_FUNC_ID
    ==============    ========    =====================================
    Function ID:      (uint32)    0x86000001
    Arguments:        (uint32)    KVM_PTP_VIRT_COUNTER(0)
                                  KVM_PTP_PHYS_COUNTER(1)
    Return Values:    (int32)     NOT_SUPPORTED(-1) on error, or
                      (uint32)    Upper 32 bits of wall clock time (r0)
                      (uint32)    Lower 32 bits of wall clock time (r1)
                      (uint32)    Upper 32 bits of counter (r2)
                      (uint32)    Lower 32 bits of counter (r3)
    Endianness:                   No Restrictions.
    ==============    ========    =====================================

Commit message:

KVM: arm64: Reformat/beautify PTP hypercall documentation
The PTP hypercall documentation doesn't produce the best-looking table
when formatting in HTML as all of the return value definitions end up
on the same line.

Reformat the PTP hypercall documentation to follow the formatting used
by hypercalls.rst.

Signed-off-by: Will Deacon <will@kernel.org>
Signed-off-by: Fuad Tabba <tabba@google.com>
Acked-by: Oliver Upton <oliver.upton@linux.dev>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20240423150538.2103045-26-tabba@google.com
Signed-off-by: Marc Zyngier <maz@kernel.org>

Documentation/virt/kvm/arm/ptp_kvm.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

PTP_KVM support for arm/arm64
=============================

PTP_KVM is used for high precision time sync between host and guests.
It relies on transferring the wall clock and counter value from the
host to the guest using a KVM-specific hypercall.

``ARM_SMCCC_VENDOR_HYP_KVM_PTP_FUNC_ID``
----------------------------------------

Retrieve current time information for the specific counter. There are no
endianness restrictions.

+---------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Presence:           | Optional                                              |
+---------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Calling convention: | HVC32                                                 |
+---------------------+----------+--------------------------------------------+
| Function ID:        | (uint32) | 0x86000001                                 |
+---------------------+----------+----+---------------------------------------+
| Arguments:          | (uint32) | R1 | ``KVM_PTP_VIRT_COUNTER (0)``          |
|                     |          |    +---------------------------------------+
|                     |          |    | ``KVM_PTP_PHYS_COUNTER (1)``          |
+---------------------+----------+----+---------------------------------------+
| Return Values:      | (int32)  | R0 | ``NOT_SUPPORTED (-1)`` on error, else |
|                     |          |    | upper 32 bits of wall clock time      |
|                     +----------+----+---------------------------------------+
|                     | (uint32) | R1 | Lower 32 bits of wall clock time      |
|                     +----------+----+---------------------------------------+
|                     | (uint32) | R2 | Upper 32 bits of counter              |
|                     +----------+----+---------------------------------------+
|                     | (uint32) | R3 | Lower 32 bits of counter              |
+---------------------+----------+----+---------------------------------------+
