# UAPI Header export list
include include/uapi/asm-generic/Kbuild.asm

generic-y += errno.h
generic-y += fcntl.h
generic-y += ioctl.h
generic-y += mman.h
generic-y += param.h
generic-y += poll.h
generic-y += resource.h
generic-y += sockios.h
generic-y += termbits.h

header-y += auxvec.h
header-y += bitsperlong.h
header-y += byteorder.h
header-y += chpid.h
header-y += chsc.h
header-y += clp.h
header-y += cmb.h
header-y += dasd.h
header-y += debug.h
header-y += errno.h
header-y += guarded_storage.h
header-y += hypfs.h
header-y += ioctls.h
header-y += ipcbuf.h
header-y += kvm.h
header-y += kvm_para.h
header-y += kvm_perf.h
header-y += kvm_virtio.h
header-y += monwriter.h
header-y += msgbuf.h
header-y += pkey.h
header-y += posix_types.h
header-y += ptrace.h
header-y += qeth.h
header-y += schid.h
header-y += sclp_ctl.h
header-y += sembuf.h
header-y += setup.h
header-y += shmbuf.h
header-y += sie.h
header-y += sigcontext.h
header-y += siginfo.h
header-y += signal.h
header-y += socket.h
header-y += stat.h
header-y += statfs.h
header-y += swab.h
header-y += tape390.h
header-y += termios.h
header-y += types.h
header-y += ucontext.h
header-y += unistd.h
header-y += virtio-ccw.h
header-y += vtoc.h
header-y += zcrypt.h
