Documentation/i2c/slave-testunit-backend.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

================================
Linux I2C slave testunit backend
================================

by Wolfram Sang <wsa@sang-engineering.com> in 2020

This backend can be used to trigger test cases for I2C bus masters which
require a remote device with certain capabilities (and which are usually not so
easy to obtain). Examples include multi-master testing, and SMBus Host Notify
testing. For some tests, the I2C slave controller must be able to switch
between master and slave mode because it needs to send data, too.

Note that this is a device for testing and debugging. It should not be enabled
in a production build. And while there is some versioning and we try hard to
keep backward compatibility, there is no stable ABI guaranteed!

Instantiating the device is regular. Example for bus 0, address 0x30:

# echo "slave-testunit 0x1030" > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-0/new_device

After that, you will have a write-only device listening. Reads will return an
8-bit version number. The device consists of 4 8-bit registers and all must be
written to start a testcase, i.e. you must always write 4 bytes to the device.
The registers are:

0x00 CMD   - which test to trigger
0x01 DATAL - configuration byte 1 for the test
0x02 DATAH - configuration byte 2 for the test
0x03 DELAY - delay in n * 10ms until test is started

Using 'i2cset' from the i2c-tools package, the generic command looks like:

# i2cset -y <bus_num> <testunit_address> <CMD> <DATAL> <DATAH> <DELAY> i

DELAY is a generic parameter which will delay the execution of the test in CMD.
The commands are described in the following section. An invalid command will
result in the transfer not being acknowledged.

Commands
--------

0x00 NOOP (reserved for future use)

0x01 READ_BYTES (also needs master mode)
   DATAL - address to read data from
   DATAH - number of bytes to read

This is useful to test if your bus master driver is handling multi-master
correctly. You can trigger the testunit to read bytes from another device on
the bus. If the bus master under test also wants to access the bus at the same
time, the bus will be busy. Example to read 128 bytes from device 0x50 after
50ms of delay:

# i2cset -y 0 0x30 0x01 0x50 0x80 0x05 i

0x02 SMBUS_HOST_NOTIFY (also needs master mode)
   DATAL - low byte of the status word to send
   DATAH - high byte of the status word to send

This test will send an SMBUS_HOST_NOTIFY message to the host. Note that the
status word is currently ignored in the Linux Kernel. Example to send a
notification after 10ms:

# i2cset -y 0 0x30 0x02 0x42 0x64 0x01 i

Commit message:

i2c: testunit: improve documentation
Mention that new CMDs will be NACKed while the old one is still
on-going, that the I2C address parameter of READ_BYTES is 7 bit only,
and reword one paragraph to be more precise.

Signed-off-by: Wolfram Sang <wsa+renesas@sang-engineering.com>
Signed-off-by: Wolfram Sang <wsa@kernel.org>

Documentation/i2c/slave-testunit-backend.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

================================
Linux I2C slave testunit backend
================================

by Wolfram Sang <wsa@sang-engineering.com> in 2020

This backend can be used to trigger test cases for I2C bus masters which
require a remote device with certain capabilities (and which are usually not so
easy to obtain). Examples include multi-master testing, and SMBus Host Notify
testing. For some tests, the I2C slave controller must be able to switch
between master and slave mode because it needs to send data, too.

Note that this is a device for testing and debugging. It should not be enabled
in a production build. And while there is some versioning and we try hard to
keep backward compatibility, there is no stable ABI guaranteed!

Instantiating the device is regular. Example for bus 0, address 0x30:

# echo "slave-testunit 0x1030" > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-0/new_device

After that, you will have a write-only device listening. Reads will just return
an 8-bit version number of the testunit. When writing, the device consists of 4
8-bit registers and all must be written to start a testcase, i.e. you must
always write 4 bytes to the device. The registers are:

0x00 CMD   - which test to trigger
0x01 DATAL - configuration byte 1 for the test
0x02 DATAH - configuration byte 2 for the test
0x03 DELAY - delay in n * 10ms until test is started

Using 'i2cset' from the i2c-tools package, the generic command looks like:

# i2cset -y <bus_num> <testunit_address> <CMD> <DATAL> <DATAH> <DELAY> i

DELAY is a generic parameter which will delay the execution of the test in CMD.
While a command is running (including the delay), new commands will not be
acknowledged. You need to wait until the old one is completed.

The commands are described in the following section. An invalid command will
result in the transfer not being acknowledged.

Commands
--------

0x00 NOOP (reserved for future use)

0x01 READ_BYTES (also needs master mode)
   DATAL - address to read data from (lower 7 bits, highest bit currently unused)
   DATAH - number of bytes to read

This is useful to test if your bus master driver is handling multi-master
correctly. You can trigger the testunit to read bytes from another device on
the bus. If the bus master under test also wants to access the bus at the same
time, the bus will be busy. Example to read 128 bytes from device 0x50 after
50ms of delay:

# i2cset -y 0 0x30 0x01 0x50 0x80 0x05 i

0x02 SMBUS_HOST_NOTIFY (also needs master mode)
   DATAL - low byte of the status word to send
   DATAH - high byte of the status word to send

This test will send an SMBUS_HOST_NOTIFY message to the host. Note that the
status word is currently ignored in the Linux Kernel. Example to send a
notification after 10ms:

# i2cset -y 0 0x30 0x02 0x42 0x64 0x01 i
