Documentation/networking/devlink/ice.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===================
ice devlink support
===================

This document describes the devlink features implemented by the ``ice``
device driver.

Info versions
=============

The ``ice`` driver reports the following versions

.. list-table:: devlink info versions implemented
    :widths: 5 5 5 90

    * - Name
      - Type
      - Example
      - Description
    * - ``board.id``
      - fixed
      - K65390-000
      - The Product Board Assembly (PBA) identifier of the board.
    * - ``fw.mgmt``
      - running
      - 2.1.7
      - 3-digit version number of the management firmware that controls the
        PHY, link, etc.
    * - ``fw.mgmt.api``
      - running
      - 1.5
      - 2-digit version number of the API exported over the AdminQ by the
        management firmware. Used by the driver to identify what commands
        are supported.
    * - ``fw.mgmt.build``
      - running
      - 0x305d955f
      - Unique identifier of the source for the management firmware.
    * - ``fw.undi``
      - running
      - 1.2581.0
      - Version of the Option ROM containing the UEFI driver. The version is
        reported in ``major.minor.patch`` format. The major version is
        incremented whenever a major breaking change occurs, or when the
        minor version would overflow. The minor version is incremented for
        non-breaking changes and reset to 1 when the major version is
        incremented. The patch version is normally 0 but is incremented when
        a fix is delivered as a patch against an older base Option ROM.
    * - ``fw.psid.api``
      - running
      - 0.80
      - Version defining the format of the flash contents.
    * - ``fw.bundle_id``
      - running
      - 0x80002ec0
      - Unique identifier of the firmware image file that was loaded onto
        the device. Also referred to as the EETRACK identifier of the NVM.
    * - ``fw.app.name``
      - running
      - ICE OS Default Package
      - The name of the DDP package that is active in the device. The DDP
        package is loaded by the driver during initialization. Each
        variation of the DDP package has a unique name.
    * - ``fw.app``
      - running
      - 1.3.1.0
      - The version of the DDP package that is active in the device. Note
        that both the name (as reported by ``fw.app.name``) and version are
        required to uniquely identify the package.
    * - ``fw.netlist``
      - running
      - 1.1.2000-6.7.0
      - The version of the netlist module. This module defines the device's
        Ethernet capabilities and default settings, and is used by the
        management firmware as part of managing link and device
        connectivity.
    * - ``fw.netlist.build``
      - running
      - 0xee16ced7
      - The first 4 bytes of the hash of the netlist module contents.

Flash Update
============

The ``ice`` driver implements support for flash update using the
``devlink-flash`` interface. It supports updating the device flash using a
combined flash image that contains the ``fw.mgmt``, ``fw.undi``, and
``fw.netlist`` components.

.. list-table:: List of supported overwrite modes
   :widths: 5 95

   * - Bits
     - Behavior
   * - ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_SETTINGS``
     - Do not preserve settings stored in the flash components being
       updated. This includes overwriting the port configuration that
       determines the number of physical functions the device will
       initialize with.
   * - ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_SETTINGS`` and ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_IDENTIFIERS``
     - Do not preserve either settings or identifiers. Overwrite everything
       in the flash with the contents from the provided image, without
       performing any preservation. This includes overwriting device
       identifying fields such as the MAC address, VPD area, and device
       serial number. It is expected that this combination be used with an
       image customized for the specific device.

The ice hardware does not support overwriting only identifiers while
preserving settings, and thus ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_IDENTIFIERS`` on its
own will be rejected. If no overwrite mask is provided, the firmware will be
instructed to preserve all settings and identifying fields when updating.

Regions
=======

The ``ice`` driver implements the following regions for accessing internal
device data.

.. list-table:: regions implemented
    :widths: 15 85

    * - Name
      - Description
    * - ``nvm-flash``
      - The contents of the entire flash chip, sometimes referred to as
        the device's Non Volatile Memory.
    * - ``device-caps``
      - The contents of the device firmware's capabilities buffer. Useful to
        determine the current state and configuration of the device.

Users can request an immediate capture of a snapshot via the
``DEVLINK_CMD_REGION_NEW``

.. code:: shell

    $ devlink region new pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1
    $ devlink region dump pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1

    $ devlink region dump pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1
    0000000000000000 0014 95dc 0014 9514 0035 1670 0034 db30
    0000000000000010 0000 0000 ffff ff04 0029 8c00 0028 8cc8
    0000000000000020 0016 0bb8 0016 1720 0000 0000 c00f 3ffc
    0000000000000030 bada cce5 bada cce5 bada cce5 bada cce5

    $ devlink region read pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1 address 0 length 16
    0000000000000000 0014 95dc 0014 9514 0035 1670 0034 db30

    $ devlink region delete pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1

    $ devlink region new pci/0000:01:00.0/device-caps snapshot 1
    $ devlink region dump pci/0000:01:00.0/device-caps snapshot 1
    0000000000000000 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000010 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000020 02 00 02 01 32 03 00 00 0a 00 00 00 25 00 00 00
    0000000000000030 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000040 04 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000050 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000060 05 00 01 00 03 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000070 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000080 06 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000090 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000a0 08 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000b0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000c0 12 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000d0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000e0 13 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000f0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000100 14 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000110 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000120 15 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000130 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000140 16 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000150 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000160 17 00 01 00 06 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000170 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000180 18 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 01 00 00 00 08 00 00 00
    0000000000000190 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001a0 22 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001b0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001c0 40 00 01 00 00 08 00 00 08 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001d0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001e0 41 00 01 00 00 08 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001f0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000200 42 00 01 00 00 08 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000210 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00

    $ devlink region delete pci/0000:01:00.0/device-caps snapshot 1

Commit message:

ice: add the DDP Track ID to devlink info
Add "fw.app.bundle_id" to display the DDP Track ID of the active DDP
package. This id is similar to "fw.bundle_id" and is a unique identifier
for the DDP package that is loaded in the device. Each new DDP has
a unique Track ID generated for it, and the ID can be used to identify
and track the DDP package.

Add documentation for the new devlink info version.

Signed-off-by: Jacob Keller <jacob.e.keller@intel.com>
Tested-by: Aaron Brown <aaron.f.brown@intel.com>
Signed-off-by: Tony Nguyen <anthony.l.nguyen@intel.com>
Signed-off-by: Jakub Kicinski <kuba@kernel.org>

Documentation/networking/devlink/ice.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===================
ice devlink support
===================

This document describes the devlink features implemented by the ``ice``
device driver.

Info versions
=============

The ``ice`` driver reports the following versions

.. list-table:: devlink info versions implemented
    :widths: 5 5 5 90

    * - Name
      - Type
      - Example
      - Description
    * - ``board.id``
      - fixed
      - K65390-000
      - The Product Board Assembly (PBA) identifier of the board.
    * - ``fw.mgmt``
      - running
      - 2.1.7
      - 3-digit version number of the management firmware that controls the
        PHY, link, etc.
    * - ``fw.mgmt.api``
      - running
      - 1.5
      - 2-digit version number of the API exported over the AdminQ by the
        management firmware. Used by the driver to identify what commands
        are supported.
    * - ``fw.mgmt.build``
      - running
      - 0x305d955f
      - Unique identifier of the source for the management firmware.
    * - ``fw.undi``
      - running
      - 1.2581.0
      - Version of the Option ROM containing the UEFI driver. The version is
        reported in ``major.minor.patch`` format. The major version is
        incremented whenever a major breaking change occurs, or when the
        minor version would overflow. The minor version is incremented for
        non-breaking changes and reset to 1 when the major version is
        incremented. The patch version is normally 0 but is incremented when
        a fix is delivered as a patch against an older base Option ROM.
    * - ``fw.psid.api``
      - running
      - 0.80
      - Version defining the format of the flash contents.
    * - ``fw.bundle_id``
      - running
      - 0x80002ec0
      - Unique identifier of the firmware image file that was loaded onto
        the device. Also referred to as the EETRACK identifier of the NVM.
    * - ``fw.app.name``
      - running
      - ICE OS Default Package
      - The name of the DDP package that is active in the device. The DDP
        package is loaded by the driver during initialization. Each
        variation of the DDP package has a unique name.
    * - ``fw.app``
      - running
      - 1.3.1.0
      - The version of the DDP package that is active in the device. Note
        that both the name (as reported by ``fw.app.name``) and version are
        required to uniquely identify the package.
    * - ``fw.app.bundle_id``
      - 0xc0000001
      - Unique identifier for the DDP package loaded in the device. Also
        referred to as the DDP Track ID. Can be used to uniquely identify
        the specific DDP package.
    * - ``fw.netlist``
      - running
      - 1.1.2000-6.7.0
      - The version of the netlist module. This module defines the device's
        Ethernet capabilities and default settings, and is used by the
        management firmware as part of managing link and device
        connectivity.
    * - ``fw.netlist.build``
      - running
      - 0xee16ced7
      - The first 4 bytes of the hash of the netlist module contents.

Flash Update
============

The ``ice`` driver implements support for flash update using the
``devlink-flash`` interface. It supports updating the device flash using a
combined flash image that contains the ``fw.mgmt``, ``fw.undi``, and
``fw.netlist`` components.

.. list-table:: List of supported overwrite modes
   :widths: 5 95

   * - Bits
     - Behavior
   * - ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_SETTINGS``
     - Do not preserve settings stored in the flash components being
       updated. This includes overwriting the port configuration that
       determines the number of physical functions the device will
       initialize with.
   * - ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_SETTINGS`` and ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_IDENTIFIERS``
     - Do not preserve either settings or identifiers. Overwrite everything
       in the flash with the contents from the provided image, without
       performing any preservation. This includes overwriting device
       identifying fields such as the MAC address, VPD area, and device
       serial number. It is expected that this combination be used with an
       image customized for the specific device.

The ice hardware does not support overwriting only identifiers while
preserving settings, and thus ``DEVLINK_FLASH_OVERWRITE_IDENTIFIERS`` on its
own will be rejected. If no overwrite mask is provided, the firmware will be
instructed to preserve all settings and identifying fields when updating.

Regions
=======

The ``ice`` driver implements the following regions for accessing internal
device data.

.. list-table:: regions implemented
    :widths: 15 85

    * - Name
      - Description
    * - ``nvm-flash``
      - The contents of the entire flash chip, sometimes referred to as
        the device's Non Volatile Memory.
    * - ``device-caps``
      - The contents of the device firmware's capabilities buffer. Useful to
        determine the current state and configuration of the device.

Users can request an immediate capture of a snapshot via the
``DEVLINK_CMD_REGION_NEW``

.. code:: shell

    $ devlink region new pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1
    $ devlink region dump pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1

    $ devlink region dump pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1
    0000000000000000 0014 95dc 0014 9514 0035 1670 0034 db30
    0000000000000010 0000 0000 ffff ff04 0029 8c00 0028 8cc8
    0000000000000020 0016 0bb8 0016 1720 0000 0000 c00f 3ffc
    0000000000000030 bada cce5 bada cce5 bada cce5 bada cce5

    $ devlink region read pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1 address 0 length 16
    0000000000000000 0014 95dc 0014 9514 0035 1670 0034 db30

    $ devlink region delete pci/0000:01:00.0/nvm-flash snapshot 1

    $ devlink region new pci/0000:01:00.0/device-caps snapshot 1
    $ devlink region dump pci/0000:01:00.0/device-caps snapshot 1
    0000000000000000 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000010 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000020 02 00 02 01 32 03 00 00 0a 00 00 00 25 00 00 00
    0000000000000030 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000040 04 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000050 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000060 05 00 01 00 03 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000070 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000080 06 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000090 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000a0 08 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000b0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000c0 12 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000d0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000e0 13 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000000f0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000100 14 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000110 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000120 15 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000130 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000140 16 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000150 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000160 17 00 01 00 06 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000170 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000180 18 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 01 00 00 00 08 00 00 00
    0000000000000190 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001a0 22 00 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001b0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001c0 40 00 01 00 00 08 00 00 08 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001d0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001e0 41 00 01 00 00 08 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    00000000000001f0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000200 42 00 01 00 00 08 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    0000000000000210 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00

    $ devlink region delete pci/0000:01:00.0/device-caps snapshot 1
