Documentation/gpu/todo.rst, before:

.. _todo:

=========
TODO list
=========

This section contains a list of smaller janitorial tasks in the kernel DRM
graphics subsystem useful as newbie projects. Or for slow rainy days.

Subsystem-wide refactorings
===========================

De-midlayer drivers
-------------------

With the recent ``drm_bus`` cleanup patches for 3.17 it is no longer required
to have a ``drm_bus`` structure set up. Drivers can directly set up the
``drm_device`` structure instead of relying on bus methods in ``drm_usb.c``
and ``drm_pci.c``. The goal is to get rid of the driver's ``->load`` /
``->unload`` callbacks and open-code the load/unload sequence properly, using
the new two-stage ``drm_device`` setup/teardown.

Once all existing drivers are converted we can also remove those bus support
files for USB and platform devices.

All you need is a GPU for a non-converted driver (currently almost all of
them, but also all the virtual ones used by KVM, so everyone qualifies).

Contact: Daniel Vetter, Thierry Reding, respective driver maintainers

Switch from reference/unreference to get/put
--------------------------------------------

For some reason DRM core uses ``reference``/``unreference`` suffixes for
refcounting functions, but kernel uses ``get``/``put`` (e.g.
``kref_get``/``put()``). It would be good to switch over for consistency, and
it's shorter. Needs to be done in 3 steps for each pair of functions:

* Create new ``get``/``put`` functions, define the old names as compatibility
  wrappers
* Switch over each file/driver using a cocci-generated spatch.
* Once all users of the old names are gone, remove them.

This way drivers/patches in the progress of getting merged won't break.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Convert existing KMS drivers to atomic modesetting
--------------------------------------------------

3.19 has the atomic modeset interfaces and helpers, so drivers can now be
converted over. Modern compositors like Wayland or Surfaceflinger on Android
really want an atomic modeset interface, so this is all about the bright
future.

There is a conversion guide for atomic and all you need is a GPU for a
non-converted driver (again virtual HW drivers for KVM are still all
suitable).

As part of this drivers also need to convert to universal plane (which means
exposing primary & cursor as proper plane objects). But that's much easier to
do by directly using the new atomic helper driver callbacks.

Contact: Daniel Vetter, respective driver maintainers

Clean up the clipped coordination confusion around planes
---------------------------------------------------------

We have a helper to get this right with drm_plane_helper_check_update(), but
it's not consistently used. This should be fixed, preferrably in the atomic
helpers (and drivers then moved over to clipped coordinates). Probably the
helper should also be moved from drm_plane_helper.c to the atomic helpers, to
avoid confusion - the other helpers in that file are all deprecated legacy
helpers.

Contact: Ville Syrjälä, Daniel Vetter, driver maintainers

Convert early atomic drivers to async commit helpers
----------------------------------------------------

For the first year the atomic modeset helpers didn't support asynchronous /
nonblocking commits, and every driver had to hand-roll them. This is fixed
now, but there's still a pile of existing drivers that easily could be
converted over to the new infrastructure.

One issue with the helpers is that they require that drivers handle completion
events for atomic commits correctly. But fixing these bugs is good anyway.

Contact: Daniel Vetter, respective driver maintainers

Better manual-upload support for atomic
---------------------------------------

This would be especially useful for tinydrm:

- Add a struct drm_rect dirty_clip to drm_crtc_state. When duplicating the
  crtc state, clear that to the max values, x/y = 0 and w/h = MAX_INT, in
  __drm_atomic_helper_crtc_duplicate_state().

- Move tinydrm_merge_clips into drm_framebuffer.c, dropping the tinydrm\_
  prefix ofc and using drm_fb\_. drm_framebuffer.c makes sense since this
  is a function useful to implement the fb->dirty function.

- Create a new drm_fb_dirty function which does essentially what e.g.
  mipi_dbi_fb_dirty does. You can use e.g. drm_atomic_helper_update_plane as the
  template. But instead of doing a simple full-screen plane update, this new
  helper also sets crtc_state->dirty_clip to the right coordinates. And of
  course it needs to check whether the fb is actually active (and maybe where),
  so there's some book-keeping involved. There's also some good fun involved in
  scaling things appropriately. For that case we might simply give up and
  declare the entire area covered by the plane as dirty.

Contact: Noralf Trønnes, Daniel Vetter

Fallout from atomic KMS
-----------------------

``drm_atomic_helper.c`` provides a batch of functions which implement legacy
IOCTLs on top of the new atomic driver interface. Which is really nice for
gradual conversion of drivers, but unfortunately the semantic mismatches are
a bit too severe. So there's some follow-up work to adjust the function
interfaces to fix these issues:

* atomic needs the lock acquire context. At the moment that's passed around
  implicitly with some horrible hacks, and it's also allocate with
  ``GFP_NOFAIL`` behind the scenes. All legacy paths need to start allocating
  the acquire context explicitly on stack and then also pass it down into
  drivers explicitly so that the legacy-on-atomic functions can use them.

  Except for some driver code this is done.

* A bunch of the vtable hooks are now in the wrong place: DRM has a split
  between core vfunc tables (named ``drm_foo_funcs``), which are used to
  implement the userspace ABI. And then there's the optional hooks for the
  helper libraries (name ``drm_foo_helper_funcs``), which are purely for
  internal use. Some of these hooks should be move from ``_funcs`` to
  ``_helper_funcs`` since they are not part of the core ABI. There's a
  ``FIXME`` comment in the kerneldoc for each such case in ``drm_crtc.h``.

* There's a new helper ``drm_atomic_helper_best_encoder()`` which could be
  used by all atomic drivers which don't select the encoder for a given
  connector at runtime. That's almost all of them, and would allow us to get
  rid of a lot of ``best_encoder`` boilerplate in drivers.

  This was almost done, but new drivers added a few more cases again.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Get rid of dev->struct_mutex from GEM drivers
---------------------------------------------

``dev->struct_mutex`` is the Big DRM Lock from legacy days and infested
everything. Nowadays in modern drivers the only bit where it's mandatory is
serializing GEM buffer object destruction. Which unfortunately means drivers
have to keep track of that lock and either call ``unreference`` or
``unreference_locked`` depending upon context.

Core GEM doesn't have a need for ``struct_mutex`` any more since kernel 4.8,
and there's a ``gem_free_object_unlocked`` callback for any drivers which are
entirely ``struct_mutex`` free.

For drivers that need ``struct_mutex`` it should be replaced with a driver-
private lock. The tricky part is the BO free functions, since those can't
reliably take that lock any more. Instead state needs to be protected with
suitable subordinate locks or some cleanup work pushed to a worker thread. For
performance-critical drivers it might also be better to go with a more
fine-grained per-buffer object and per-context lockings scheme. Currently the
following drivers still use ``struct_mutex``: ``msm``, ``omapdrm`` and
``udl``.

Contact: Daniel Vetter, respective driver maintainers

Convert instances of dev_info/dev_err/dev_warn to their DRM_DEV_* equivalent
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

For drivers which could have multiple instances, it is necessary to
differentiate between which is which in the logs. Since DRM_INFO/WARN/ERROR
don't do this, drivers used dev_info/warn/err to make this differentiation. We
now have DRM_DEV_* variants of the drm print macros, so we can start to convert
those drivers back to using drm-formwatted specific log messages.

Before you start this conversion please contact the relevant maintainers to make
sure your work will be merged - not everyone agrees that the DRM dmesg macros
are better.

Contact: Sean Paul, Maintainer of the driver you plan to convert

Core refactorings
=================

Clean up the DRM header mess
----------------------------

Currently the DRM subsystem has only one global header, ``drmP.h``. This is
used both for functions exported to helper libraries and drivers and functions
only used internally in the ``drm.ko`` module. The goal would be to move all
header declarations not needed outside of ``drm.ko`` into
``drivers/gpu/drm/drm_*_internal.h`` header files. ``EXPORT_SYMBOL`` also
needs to be dropped for these functions.

This would nicely tie in with the below task to create kerneldoc after the API
is cleaned up. Or with the "hide legacy cruft better" task.

Note that this is well in progress, but ``drmP.h`` is still huge. The updated
plan is to switch to per-file driver API headers, which will also structure
the kerneldoc better. This should also allow more fine-grained ``#include``
directives.

In the end no .c file should need to include ``drmP.h`` anymore.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Add missing kerneldoc for exported functions
--------------------------------------------

The DRM reference documentation is still lacking kerneldoc in a few areas. The
task would be to clean up interfaces like moving functions around between
files to better group them and improving the interfaces like dropping return
values for functions that never fail. Then write kerneldoc for all exported
functions and an overview section and integrate it all into the drm book.

See https://dri.freedesktop.org/docs/drm/ for what's there already.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Hide legacy cruft better
------------------------

Way back DRM supported only drivers which shadow-attached to PCI devices with
userspace or fbdev drivers setting up outputs. Modern DRM drivers take charge
of the entire device, you can spot them with the DRIVER_MODESET flag.

Unfortunately there's still large piles of legacy code around which needs to
be hidden so that driver writers don't accidentally end up using it. And to
prevent security issues in those legacy IOCTLs from being exploited on modern
drivers. This has multiple possible subtasks:

* Extract support code for legacy features into a ``drm-legacy.ko`` kernel
  module and compile it only when one of the legacy drivers is enabled.

This is mostly done, the only thing left is to split up ``drm_irq.c`` into
legacy cruft and the parts needed by modern KMS drivers.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Make panic handling work
------------------------

This is a really varied tasks with lots of little bits and pieces:

* The panic path can't be tested currently, leading to constant breaking. The
  main issue here is that panics can be triggered from hardirq contexts and
  hence all panic related callback can run in hardirq context. It would be
  awesome if we could test at least the fbdev helper code and driver code by
  e.g. trigger calls through drm debugfs files. hardirq context could be
  achieved by using an IPI to the local processor.

* There's a massive confusion of different panic handlers. DRM fbdev emulation
  helpers have one, but on top of that the fbcon code itself also has one. We
  need to make sure that they stop fighting over each another.

* ``drm_can_sleep()`` is a mess. It hides real bugs in normal operations and
  isn't a full solution for panic paths. We need to make sure that it only
  returns true if there's a panic going on for real, and fix up all the
  fallout.

* The panic handler must never sleep, which also means it can't ever
  ``mutex_lock()``. Also it can't grab any other lock unconditionally, not
  even spinlocks (because NMI and hardirq can panic too). We need to either
  make sure to not call such paths, or trylock everything. Really tricky.

* For the above locking troubles reasons it's pretty much impossible to
  attempt a synchronous modeset from panic handlers. The only thing we could
  try to achive is an atomic ``set_base`` of the primary plane, and hope that
  it shows up. Everything else probably needs to be delayed to some worker or
  something else which happens later on. Otherwise it just kills the box
  harder, prevent the panic from going out on e.g. netconsole.

* There's also proposal for a simplied DRM console instead of the full-blown
  fbcon and DRM fbdev emulation. Any kind of panic handling tricks should
  obviously work for both console, in case we ever get kmslog merged.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Clean up the debugfs support
----------------------------

There's a bunch of issues with it:

- The drm_info_list ->show() function doesn't even bother to cast to the drm
  structure for you. This is lazy.

- We probably want to have some support for debugfs files on crtc/connectors and
  maybe other kms objects directly in core. There's even drm_print support in
  the funcs for these objects to dump kms state, so it's all there. And then the
  ->show() functions should obviously give you a pointer to the right object.

- The drm_info_list stuff is centered on drm_minor instead of drm_device. For
  anything we want to print drm_device (or maybe drm_file) is the right thing.

- The drm_driver->debugfs_init hooks we have is just an artifact of the old
  midlayered load sequence. DRM debugfs should work more like sysfs, where you
  can create properties/files for an object anytime you want, and the core
  takes care of publishing/unpuplishing all the files at register/unregister
  time. Drivers shouldn't need to worry about these technicalities, and fixing
  this (together with the drm_minor->drm_device move) would allow us to remove
  debugfs_init.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

KMS cleanups
------------

Some of these date from the very introduction of KMS in 2008 ...

- drm_mode_config.crtc_idr is misnamed, since it contains all KMS object. Should
  be renamed to drm_mode_config.object_idr.

- drm_display_mode doesn't need to be derived from drm_mode_object. That's
  leftovers from older (never merged into upstream) KMS designs where modes
  where set using their ID, including support to add/remove modes.

Better Testing
==============

Enable trinity for DRM
----------------------

And fix up the fallout. Should be really interesting ...

Make KMS tests in i-g-t generic
-------------------------------

The i915 driver team maintains an extensive testsuite for the i915 DRM driver,
including tons of testcases for corner-cases in the modesetting API. It would
be awesome if those tests (at least the ones not relying on Intel-specific GEM
features) could be made to run on any KMS driver.

Basic work to run i-g-t tests on non-i915 is done, what's now missing is mass-
converting things over. For modeset tests we also first need a bit of
infrastructure to use dumb buffers for untiled buffers, to be able to run all
the non-i915 specific modeset tests.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Create a virtual KMS driver for testing (vkms)
----------------------------------------------

With all the latest helpers it should be fairly simple to create a virtual KMS
driver useful for testing, or for running X or similar on headless machines
(to be able to still use the GPU). This would be similar to vgem, but aimed at
the modeset side.

Once the basics are there there's tons of possibilities to extend it.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Driver Specific
===============

tinydrm
-------

Tinydrm is the helper driver for really simple fb drivers. The goal is to make
those drivers as simple as possible, so lots of room for refactoring:

- backlight helpers, probably best to put them into a new drm_backlight.c.
  This is because drivers/video is de-facto unmaintained. We could also
  move drivers/video/backlight to drivers/gpu/backlight and take it all
  over within drm-misc, but that's more work. Backlight helpers require a fair
  bit of reworking and refactoring. A simple example is the enabling of a backlight.
  Tinydrm has helpers for this. It would be good if other drivers can also use the
  helper. However, there are various cases we need to consider i.e different
  drivers seem to have different ways of enabling/disabling a backlight.
  We also need to consider the backlight drivers (like gpio_backlight). The situation
  is further complicated by the fact that the backlight is tied to fbdev
  via fb_notifier_callback() which has complicated logic. For further details, refer
  to the following discussion thread:
  https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/outreachy-kernel/8rBe30lwtdA

- spi helpers, probably best put into spi core/helper code. Thierry said
  the spi maintainer is fast&reactive, so shouldn't be a big issue.

- extract the mipi-dbi helper (well, the non-tinydrm specific parts at
  least) into a separate helper, like we have for mipi-dsi already. Or follow
  one of the ideas for having a shared dsi/dbi helper, abstracting away the
  transport details more.

- tinydrm_lastclose could be drm_fb_helper_lastclose. Only thing we need
  for that is to store the drm_fb_helper pointer somewhere in
  drm_device->mode_config. And then we could roll that out to all the
  drivers.

- tinydrm_gem_cma_prime_import_sg_table should probably go into the cma
  helpers, as a _vmapped variant (since not every driver needs the vmap).
  And tinydrm_gem_cma_free_object could the be merged into
  drm_gem_cma_free_object().

- tinydrm_fb_create we could move into drm_simple_pipe, only need to add
  the fb_create hook to drm_simple_pipe_funcs, which would again simplify a
  bunch of things (since it gives you a one-stop vfunc for simple drivers).

- Quick aside: The unregister devm stuff is kinda getting the lifetimes of
  a drm_device wrong. Doesn't matter, since everyone else gets it wrong
  too :-)

- also rework the drm_framebuffer_funcs->dirty hook wire-up, see above.

Contact: Noralf Trønnes, Daniel Vetter

Outside DRM
===========

Commit message:

drm/docs: Add todo entry for simple modeset suspend/resume
Add entry for conversion of drivers to new helpers.

Signed-off-by: Noralf Trønnes <noralf@tronnes.org>
Reviewed-by: Daniel Vetter <daniel.vetter@ffwll.ch>
Link: https://patchwork.freedesktop.org/patch/msgid/20171106191812.38927-7-noralf@tronnes.org

Documentation/gpu/todo.rst, after:

.. _todo:

=========
TODO list
=========

This section contains a list of smaller janitorial tasks in the kernel DRM
graphics subsystem useful as newbie projects. Or for slow rainy days.

Subsystem-wide refactorings
===========================

De-midlayer drivers
-------------------

With the recent ``drm_bus`` cleanup patches for 3.17 it is no longer required
to have a ``drm_bus`` structure set up. Drivers can directly set up the
``drm_device`` structure instead of relying on bus methods in ``drm_usb.c``
and ``drm_pci.c``. The goal is to get rid of the driver's ``->load`` /
``->unload`` callbacks and open-code the load/unload sequence properly, using
the new two-stage ``drm_device`` setup/teardown.

Once all existing drivers are converted we can also remove those bus support
files for USB and platform devices.

All you need is a GPU for a non-converted driver (currently almost all of
them, but also all the virtual ones used by KVM, so everyone qualifies).

Contact: Daniel Vetter, Thierry Reding, respective driver maintainers

Switch from reference/unreference to get/put
--------------------------------------------

For some reason DRM core uses ``reference``/``unreference`` suffixes for
refcounting functions, but kernel uses ``get``/``put`` (e.g.
``kref_get``/``put()``). It would be good to switch over for consistency, and
it's shorter. Needs to be done in 3 steps for each pair of functions:

* Create new ``get``/``put`` functions, define the old names as compatibility
  wrappers
* Switch over each file/driver using a cocci-generated spatch.
* Once all users of the old names are gone, remove them.

This way drivers/patches in the progress of getting merged won't break.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Convert existing KMS drivers to atomic modesetting
--------------------------------------------------

3.19 has the atomic modeset interfaces and helpers, so drivers can now be
converted over. Modern compositors like Wayland or Surfaceflinger on Android
really want an atomic modeset interface, so this is all about the bright
future.

There is a conversion guide for atomic and all you need is a GPU for a
non-converted driver (again virtual HW drivers for KVM are still all
suitable).

As part of this drivers also need to convert to universal plane (which means
exposing primary & cursor as proper plane objects). But that's much easier to
do by directly using the new atomic helper driver callbacks.

Contact: Daniel Vetter, respective driver maintainers

Clean up the clipped coordination confusion around planes
---------------------------------------------------------

We have a helper to get this right with drm_plane_helper_check_update(), but
it's not consistently used. This should be fixed, preferrably in the atomic
helpers (and drivers then moved over to clipped coordinates). Probably the
helper should also be moved from drm_plane_helper.c to the atomic helpers, to
avoid confusion - the other helpers in that file are all deprecated legacy
helpers.

Contact: Ville Syrjälä, Daniel Vetter, driver maintainers

Convert early atomic drivers to async commit helpers
----------------------------------------------------

For the first year the atomic modeset helpers didn't support asynchronous /
nonblocking commits, and every driver had to hand-roll them. This is fixed
now, but there's still a pile of existing drivers that easily could be
converted over to the new infrastructure.

One issue with the helpers is that they require that drivers handle completion
events for atomic commits correctly. But fixing these bugs is good anyway.

Contact: Daniel Vetter, respective driver maintainers

Better manual-upload support for atomic
---------------------------------------

This would be especially useful for tinydrm:

- Add a struct drm_rect dirty_clip to drm_crtc_state. When duplicating the
  crtc state, clear that to the max values, x/y = 0 and w/h = MAX_INT, in
  __drm_atomic_helper_crtc_duplicate_state().

- Move tinydrm_merge_clips into drm_framebuffer.c, dropping the tinydrm\_
  prefix ofc and using drm_fb\_. drm_framebuffer.c makes sense since this
  is a function useful to implement the fb->dirty function.

- Create a new drm_fb_dirty function which does essentially what e.g.
  mipi_dbi_fb_dirty does. You can use e.g. drm_atomic_helper_update_plane as the
  template. But instead of doing a simple full-screen plane update, this new
  helper also sets crtc_state->dirty_clip to the right coordinates. And of
  course it needs to check whether the fb is actually active (and maybe where),
  so there's some book-keeping involved. There's also some good fun involved in
  scaling things appropriately. For that case we might simply give up and
  declare the entire area covered by the plane as dirty.

Contact: Noralf Trønnes, Daniel Vetter

Fallout from atomic KMS
-----------------------

``drm_atomic_helper.c`` provides a batch of functions which implement legacy
IOCTLs on top of the new atomic driver interface. Which is really nice for
gradual conversion of drivers, but unfortunately the semantic mismatches are
a bit too severe. So there's some follow-up work to adjust the function
interfaces to fix these issues:

* atomic needs the lock acquire context. At the moment that's passed around
  implicitly with some horrible hacks, and it's also allocate with
  ``GFP_NOFAIL`` behind the scenes. All legacy paths need to start allocating
  the acquire context explicitly on stack and then also pass it down into
  drivers explicitly so that the legacy-on-atomic functions can use them.

  Except for some driver code this is done.

* A bunch of the vtable hooks are now in the wrong place: DRM has a split
  between core vfunc tables (named ``drm_foo_funcs``), which are used to
  implement the userspace ABI. And then there's the optional hooks for the
  helper libraries (name ``drm_foo_helper_funcs``), which are purely for
  internal use. Some of these hooks should be move from ``_funcs`` to
  ``_helper_funcs`` since they are not part of the core ABI. There's a
  ``FIXME`` comment in the kerneldoc for each such case in ``drm_crtc.h``.

* There's a new helper ``drm_atomic_helper_best_encoder()`` which could be
  used by all atomic drivers which don't select the encoder for a given
  connector at runtime. That's almost all of them, and would allow us to get
  rid of a lot of ``best_encoder`` boilerplate in drivers.

  This was almost done, but new drivers added a few more cases again.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Get rid of dev->struct_mutex from GEM drivers
---------------------------------------------

``dev->struct_mutex`` is the Big DRM Lock from legacy days and infested
everything. Nowadays in modern drivers the only bit where it's mandatory is
serializing GEM buffer object destruction. Which unfortunately means drivers
have to keep track of that lock and either call ``unreference`` or
``unreference_locked`` depending upon context.

Core GEM doesn't have a need for ``struct_mutex`` any more since kernel 4.8,
and there's a ``gem_free_object_unlocked`` callback for any drivers which are
entirely ``struct_mutex`` free.

For drivers that need ``struct_mutex`` it should be replaced with a driver-
private lock. The tricky part is the BO free functions, since those can't
reliably take that lock any more. Instead state needs to be protected with
suitable subordinate locks or some cleanup work pushed to a worker thread. For
performance-critical drivers it might also be better to go with a more
fine-grained per-buffer object and per-context lockings scheme. Currently the
following drivers still use ``struct_mutex``: ``msm``, ``omapdrm`` and
``udl``.

Contact: Daniel Vetter, respective driver maintainers

Convert instances of dev_info/dev_err/dev_warn to their DRM_DEV_* equivalent
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

For drivers which could have multiple instances, it is necessary to
differentiate between which is which in the logs. Since DRM_INFO/WARN/ERROR
don't do this, drivers used dev_info/warn/err to make this differentiation. We
now have DRM_DEV_* variants of the drm print macros, so we can start to convert
those drivers back to using drm-formwatted specific log messages.

Before you start this conversion please contact the relevant maintainers to make
sure your work will be merged - not everyone agrees that the DRM dmesg macros
are better.

Contact: Sean Paul, Maintainer of the driver you plan to convert

Convert drivers to use simple modeset suspend/resume
----------------------------------------------------

Most drivers (except i915 and nouveau) that use
drm_atomic_helper_suspend/resume() can probably be converted to use
drm_mode_config_helper_suspend/resume().

Contact: Maintainer of the driver you plan to convert

Core refactorings
=================

Clean up the DRM header mess
----------------------------

Currently the DRM subsystem has only one global header, ``drmP.h``. This is
used both for functions exported to helper libraries and drivers and functions
only used internally in the ``drm.ko`` module. The goal would be to move all
header declarations not needed outside of ``drm.ko`` into
``drivers/gpu/drm/drm_*_internal.h`` header files. ``EXPORT_SYMBOL`` also
needs to be dropped for these functions.

This would nicely tie in with the below task to create kerneldoc after the API
is cleaned up. Or with the "hide legacy cruft better" task.

Note that this is well in progress, but ``drmP.h`` is still huge. The updated
plan is to switch to per-file driver API headers, which will also structure
the kerneldoc better. This should also allow more fine-grained ``#include``
directives.

In the end no .c file should need to include ``drmP.h`` anymore.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Add missing kerneldoc for exported functions
--------------------------------------------

The DRM reference documentation is still lacking kerneldoc in a few areas. The
task would be to clean up interfaces like moving functions around between
files to better group them and improving the interfaces like dropping return
values for functions that never fail. Then write kerneldoc for all exported
functions and an overview section and integrate it all into the drm book.

See https://dri.freedesktop.org/docs/drm/ for what's there already.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Hide legacy cruft better
------------------------

Way back DRM supported only drivers which shadow-attached to PCI devices with
userspace or fbdev drivers setting up outputs. Modern DRM drivers take charge
of the entire device, you can spot them with the DRIVER_MODESET flag.

Unfortunately there's still large piles of legacy code around which needs to
be hidden so that driver writers don't accidentally end up using it. And to
prevent security issues in those legacy IOCTLs from being exploited on modern
drivers. This has multiple possible subtasks:

* Extract support code for legacy features into a ``drm-legacy.ko`` kernel
  module and compile it only when one of the legacy drivers is enabled.

This is mostly done, the only thing left is to split up ``drm_irq.c`` into
legacy cruft and the parts needed by modern KMS drivers.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Make panic handling work
------------------------

This is a really varied tasks with lots of little bits and pieces:

* The panic path can't be tested currently, leading to constant breaking. The
  main issue here is that panics can be triggered from hardirq contexts and
  hence all panic related callback can run in hardirq context. It would be
  awesome if we could test at least the fbdev helper code and driver code by
  e.g. trigger calls through drm debugfs files. hardirq context could be
  achieved by using an IPI to the local processor.

* There's a massive confusion of different panic handlers. DRM fbdev emulation
  helpers have one, but on top of that the fbcon code itself also has one. We
  need to make sure that they stop fighting over each another.

* ``drm_can_sleep()`` is a mess. It hides real bugs in normal operations and
  isn't a full solution for panic paths. We need to make sure that it only
  returns true if there's a panic going on for real, and fix up all the
  fallout.

* The panic handler must never sleep, which also means it can't ever
  ``mutex_lock()``. Also it can't grab any other lock unconditionally, not
  even spinlocks (because NMI and hardirq can panic too). We need to either
  make sure to not call such paths, or trylock everything. Really tricky.

* For the above locking troubles reasons it's pretty much impossible to
  attempt a synchronous modeset from panic handlers. The only thing we could
  try to achive is an atomic ``set_base`` of the primary plane, and hope that
  it shows up. Everything else probably needs to be delayed to some worker or
  something else which happens later on. Otherwise it just kills the box
  harder, prevent the panic from going out on e.g. netconsole.

* There's also proposal for a simplied DRM console instead of the full-blown
  fbcon and DRM fbdev emulation. Any kind of panic handling tricks should
  obviously work for both console, in case we ever get kmslog merged.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Clean up the debugfs support
----------------------------

There's a bunch of issues with it:

- The drm_info_list ->show() function doesn't even bother to cast to the drm
  structure for you. This is lazy.

- We probably want to have some support for debugfs files on crtc/connectors and
  maybe other kms objects directly in core. There's even drm_print support in
  the funcs for these objects to dump kms state, so it's all there. And then the
  ->show() functions should obviously give you a pointer to the right object.

- The drm_info_list stuff is centered on drm_minor instead of drm_device. For
  anything we want to print drm_device (or maybe drm_file) is the right thing.

- The drm_driver->debugfs_init hooks we have is just an artifact of the old
  midlayered load sequence. DRM debugfs should work more like sysfs, where you
  can create properties/files for an object anytime you want, and the core
  takes care of publishing/unpuplishing all the files at register/unregister
  time. Drivers shouldn't need to worry about these technicalities, and fixing
  this (together with the drm_minor->drm_device move) would allow us to remove
  debugfs_init.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

KMS cleanups
------------

Some of these date from the very introduction of KMS in 2008 ...

- drm_mode_config.crtc_idr is misnamed, since it contains all KMS object. Should
  be renamed to drm_mode_config.object_idr.

- drm_display_mode doesn't need to be derived from drm_mode_object. That's
  leftovers from older (never merged into upstream) KMS designs where modes
  where set using their ID, including support to add/remove modes.

Better Testing
==============

Enable trinity for DRM
----------------------

And fix up the fallout. Should be really interesting ...

Make KMS tests in i-g-t generic
-------------------------------

The i915 driver team maintains an extensive testsuite for the i915 DRM driver,
including tons of testcases for corner-cases in the modesetting API. It would
be awesome if those tests (at least the ones not relying on Intel-specific GEM
features) could be made to run on any KMS driver.

Basic work to run i-g-t tests on non-i915 is done, what's now missing is mass-
converting things over. For modeset tests we also first need a bit of
infrastructure to use dumb buffers for untiled buffers, to be able to run all
the non-i915 specific modeset tests.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Create a virtual KMS driver for testing (vkms)
----------------------------------------------

With all the latest helpers it should be fairly simple to create a virtual KMS
driver useful for testing, or for running X or similar on headless machines
(to be able to still use the GPU). This would be similar to vgem, but aimed at
the modeset side.

Once the basics are there there's tons of possibilities to extend it.

Contact: Daniel Vetter

Driver Specific
===============

tinydrm
-------

Tinydrm is the helper driver for really simple fb drivers. The goal is to make
those drivers as simple as possible, so lots of room for refactoring:

- backlight helpers, probably best to put them into a new drm_backlight.c.
  This is because drivers/video is de-facto unmaintained. We could also
  move drivers/video/backlight to drivers/gpu/backlight and take it all
  over within drm-misc, but that's more work. Backlight helpers require a fair
  bit of reworking and refactoring. A simple example is the enabling of a backlight.
  Tinydrm has helpers for this. It would be good if other drivers can also use the
  helper. However, there are various cases we need to consider i.e different
  drivers seem to have different ways of enabling/disabling a backlight.
  We also need to consider the backlight drivers (like gpio_backlight). The situation
  is further complicated by the fact that the backlight is tied to fbdev
  via fb_notifier_callback() which has complicated logic. For further details, refer
  to the following discussion thread:
  https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/outreachy-kernel/8rBe30lwtdA

- spi helpers, probably best put into spi core/helper code. Thierry said
  the spi maintainer is fast&reactive, so shouldn't be a big issue.

- extract the mipi-dbi helper (well, the non-tinydrm specific parts at
  least) into a separate helper, like we have for mipi-dsi already. Or follow
  one of the ideas for having a shared dsi/dbi helper, abstracting away the
  transport details more.

- tinydrm_lastclose could be drm_fb_helper_lastclose. Only thing we need
  for that is to store the drm_fb_helper pointer somewhere in
  drm_device->mode_config. And then we could roll that out to all the
  drivers.

- tinydrm_gem_cma_prime_import_sg_table should probably go into the cma
  helpers, as a _vmapped variant (since not every driver needs the vmap).
  And tinydrm_gem_cma_free_object could the be merged into
  drm_gem_cma_free_object().

- tinydrm_fb_create we could move into drm_simple_pipe, only need to add
  the fb_create hook to drm_simple_pipe_funcs, which would again simplify a
  bunch of things (since it gives you a one-stop vfunc for simple drivers).

- Quick aside: The unregister devm stuff is kinda getting the lifetimes of
  a drm_device wrong. Doesn't matter, since everyone else gets it wrong
  too :-)

- also rework the drm_framebuffer_funcs->dirty hook wire-up, see above.

Contact: Noralf Trønnes, Daniel Vetter

Outside DRM
===========
